My name is Nic Fishman, I'm an undergrad at Stanford University pursuing a double major in Computer Science and Bioengineering. I want to use machine learning to help people, in any way I can: everything from biomedical research to cybersecurity to activism. I'm currently working at the intersection of genetic engineering and artificial intelligence, building neural networks to generate DNA sequence in the <a href="https://sites.google.com/site/anshulkundaje/students" target="_blank">Kundaje Lab</a>. I am building early detection systems to identify threats to computer systems in time to mitigate damage at<a href="https://starlab.io/what-we-do/" target="_blank">Star Lab</a>. Finally I'm helping to develop a progressive agenda at <a href="https://www.dataforprogress.org/" target="_blank">Data for Progress</a>.

Taking a wider view (much as I'd like to believe it, I'm more than just the work I do), I'm Latinx and Jewish, a combo that lends itself to a taste for good food. Accordingly, because I've lived all over the world, I've eaten well on four continents. Of course to avoid the fallout from that lifestyle I've run on beaches from Thailand to Nicaragua, and gotten shin splints trying to do the same in cities from DC to San Francisco. Moving around so much, the place I honestly feel most comfortable is a stereotypical hipster cafe. Accordingly, I have a propensity for finding cool coffee shops in even the most rural towns, a talent that comes in handy more often than you might think. There's nothing better than sitting down, sipping a latte and reading something interesting.